---
layout: post
title: "XOR (Exclusive OR)"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt: "XOR is a powerful operator."
tags: [xor, binary-operators]
author: jared_wood
share: true
image:
  feature:
date: 2018-02-27
---

## XOR

This is a simple note really, but the importance of the XOR operator (^) is significant.

Given some sets in any space there may be some overlap among the sets. There may also be space that is only occupied by a single set. The XOR finds all of the single-set occupant subsets and outputs a single set that is the union of these single-set occupant subsets.

There are obviously many uses of such an operation. For example, in some circumstances these single-occupant subsets may highlight unique characteristics of their supersets.

## Tracking discrete state

A major application of the XOR operator is in tracking discrete state. A discrete state can be represented by an equivalent binary state. Then the state becomes a sequence of bits that can be turned on and off. For example, one bit in a machine's state could be whether it's on or off.

Let's expand on this a bit. Let a system state be represented by a set of discrete sub states. Each of these sub states are independent of each other. Let each sub state be represented by a unique, random bit sequence such that each sub state has some bits that are unique to that state. Then the system state can then be represented by the XOR of all the sub states.

Additionally, if you want to toggle a single sub state then all you have to do is XOR the system state with the sub state.

